the
world in May 2021 in the aftermath of
Israel's 11-day bombardment of Gaza that
killed 250 Palestinians the un
independent International Commission of
inquiry on the occupied Palestinian
territory and Israel was
established its mandate to investigate
all alleged violations of international
humanitarian law establish the
underlying causes of recurrent tensions
document and verify the evidence and
identify those
responsible the woman leading the
inquiry is former un High Commissioner
for human rights Navi
pil weeks before Hamas carried out its
October the 7th surprise offensive in
southern
Israel and Israel launched a major
military operation in Gaza P released a
report it says the commission finds the
increasingly militarized law enforcement
operations of Israel and repeated
attacks by Israel on Gaza are aimed at
maintaining its unlawful 56-year
occupation with the latest escalation
now in its third week nav pil talks to
Al
jazer Na P thank you for talking to Al
jazer let's just start at the beginning
about what your commission is you are a
distinguished judge but this isn't a
court this is an investigating uh
mechanism my understanding is is it was
set up in uh 2021 immediately after the
fourth Gaza War I assume the Human
Rights Council who set this up wanted to
avoid another Gaza war and yet we now
have a fifth Gaza War which is bloodier
than any of the conflicts in the
past yeah thank you very much for this
opportunity James thank you for your
program
um this is a uh it's obviously not a
court of law
but all commissions do follow some of
the precepts of a Judicial inquiry and
that is respecting Independence
impartiality carefully weighing the
evidence so it's much uh more secure
than uh you know press statements
issued by institutions and so on so
that's the beauty of Commission of
inquiry they do investigate they produce
reports they make recommendations which
is what we have done now in this
particular commission has a very wide
mandate firstly it's not time bound it's
almost permanent and that's one of the
reasons why some States including the
United States and Europe did not support
the establishment of this commission
that it doesn't have an end date to
which I have said said well the
occupation doesn't have an end date
either and you tend to support that
occupation um the other aspects of the
Mandate are that we have an
investigative mandate we can uh identify
suspects key perpetrators work with
judicial institutions such as the
international court of justice and uh as
I said already to make
recommendations uh to look into to um
the root causes of the conflict that's a
very important mandate that has not been
done before above all we have a
territorial jurisdiction that does not
apply to any other commission and that
is we have jurisdiction
over in inside Israel Palestine the West
Bank and Gaza so that's a a wide
jurisdiction and that's why we can cover
new and emerging issues such as the
events that are happening now
yes I I agree with you that clearly uh
Palestine that moved for this commission
had in mind that once and for all they
could attend to crucial questions such
as the observance of international law
the end of the occupation and other
matters that are crucial to end the
conflict to achieve peace in in the
Middle East and I imagine that that's
why they they want Ed this Commission of
inquiry and you're quite right then it
we were all taken completely unawares by
this attack that was committed by
Hamas now your latest report doesn't
cover the events after uh October the
7th uh but um you obviously have um an
inquiry um your your investigation can
look at those in future reports let me
ask you about those uh what Hass did
first on on that date are those war
crimes yeah firstly say let me say our
current report was actually completed in
August these are the UN rules it was
filed here
but immediately after October 7th when
the uh this attack
occurred and Hamas has admitted their
responsibility that's why we acknowledge
them as the responsible party
uh we because of our extended mandate
immediately dropped our own planned
program of work and jumped into
investigating this uh by the third day
we issued a press statement condemning
this attack because it harmed civilians
and violated international law and we
called for submissions we immediately
started collecting Gathering evidence to
fulfill our Mandate of achieving Justice
and accountability working with Justice
institutions such as the international
criminal court from the evidence that we
gathered it's clear to us that war
crimes are being committed and now with
the uh Israeli action or reaction to the
Hamas attack we really find from the
facts that war crimes are being
committed have been committed by Hamas
are being committed by Israel and that's
because of the indiscriminate attack and
the killings and injuries to civilians
including children obviously since then
we've seen a massive bombardment by
Israel do you in your view consider this
is legitimate self-defense or is this
Collective punishment and in fact brutal
Revenge from the evidence we've already
gathered we are concluding that this is
indiscriminate attacks against civilians
very excessive and does not conform with
the requisites of international law
which is
disproportionality and with the focus on
protection of civilians and therefore we
thought this cannot uh be equated with
self-defense it's it am monst to
Collective punishment and we know the
facts of those who are dying over half
of those who die are women and children
so far I've heard the statistic that you
know we we're not sure of any of this we
in we will establish these statistics
later but without
verification I'm horrified at the figure
of just two of the children who have
been killed how can children ever be
deemed to be a a threat so much so that
Israel has to defend itself against
these babies and children on the sixth
day of the war Israel itself they said
they dropped 6,000 bombs that's the same
number used by the US in their battle
against isil in raaka and in six days
they used more bombs than the US used in
Afghanistan in a single year what do you
make of
that I think this should shock all of us
into rapid reaction I'm right here at
the UN as I speak to you James and I'm
appalled at the lack of uh quick
decisions in the deliberations that are
going on in the security Council and the
general assembly these are the facts
that they that should be before them to
immediately demand what we have already
called for in our press statement which
is a cessation of
hostilities not just a humanitarian
pause I think I believe that's a subject
matter of the discussion but a ceasefire
and why we call for that is because
civilians are at risk
International humanitarian law and the
uh Geneva conventions are being violated
very seriously in front of our
eyes well let me ask you about some of
the other things let let me let me ask
you about some of the other things that
Israel has done and whether you think
these are violations of international
law they've cut off the water and the
electricity they've only allowed limited
aid supplies in and they're not allowing
fuel in now fuel is needed as you know
to pump the water and for desalination
of the water but also for the hospitals
uh the uh dialysis machines ventilators
they may all have to be shut off and
there's also a very disturbing report
that perhaps incubators which are
keeping more than a hundred uh new
babies alive may also have to be shut
off are these war
crimes these are war crimes they are
clear violations of international law
and here let me take my cap off as the
chair of the this commission and to
speak as my lengthy judicial experience
both on the Rwanda the United Nations
Tribunal for Rwanda and the
international criminal court so I know
the way judges weigh the evidence that
these facts will clearly amount to very
serious war crimes they have to stop
immediately the other thing that Israel
has done is ordered people in Gaza City
and the north to move to the south of
the Gaza Strip initially they gave
people only 24 hours and as you know
that population includes elderly people
people with children people who are in
hospital who cannot move that sort of
order that sort of instruction from
Israel does that count as forc
deportation in your view we've already
thought so we're looking at that you
know we reported these forced
deportations forced removal dislocation
of uh Palestinians in our report that we
had completed in August and now we see
the situation much worse when people in
the north of Gaza are being ordered to
move out of there I mean to move where
nobody wants to receive them but the
worst situation is uh we've already
heard from some families that when they
moved from the north to the south of
Gaza they were bombed one person said
his entire family has been killed
uh so with uh great anxiety we've now uh
adopted an attitude of Expediting our
investigation as fast as we can and
these latest events as I said they're
not in this current report uh but the
current report shows the events of the
last year before what we've seen in the
last few weeks and one of the things
that's in this current report uh is the
killing of our Al jazer colleague
Shireen Abu akle now I always always try
and be impartial but it's very very hard
on this occasion because she was our
colleague and I worked with Shireen but
let me ask you about that day that she
died early in the morning there was an
Israeli military raid in Janine a pred
Dawn raid and along with other reporters
from Al jazer and other media she went
to go and cover what was clearly a
newsworthy event you've looked into this
closely what happened then our
investigation and our concl clusions
that we incorporated in our report and
delivered to the general assembly is now
in fact a United Nation's investigation
so firstly that's the beauty of the
Mandate they didn't have to create a new
mechanism to investigate this we have
done so uh even with limited resources
we were able to engage in a forensic
examination we
identified the
Israeli Defense Force milit unit it's
the do Dean uh unit and we know the
commander of that unit we have his name
we haven't disclosed the name as yet but
we will to a Judicial institution and so
we found that that was uh a direct
intentional killing of uh Shireen with
her and she's been deprived of her right
to life if a killing is not investigated
and
if if not if there's no apology and
compensation that at least there must be
Justice and the perpetrators must be
brought to account now Shireen was with
other press they were clearly were they
not um identifiable as members of the
press also I understand sharim was shot
in the head they clearly intended to
kill
her the as a commission we ourselves
held oral hearings in Geneva and the
journalist who accompanied
Shireen and and he took a bullet in his
arm I
think he gave evidence before so we
already have his
evidence that there Shireen was there to
report on violations as she saw them in
Janine so she was there for a true
journalistic uh reason and I think we
the
public are appalled when a journalist is
attacked because that journalist was
doing a service for us the public she
was you at Great risk she was reporting
on events so that we will be informed
and that's why this her killing is
causing so much grief not only to the
family but to the media world and to all
of us what do you make of what the isra
what the Israelis said about this
immediately after the killing they said
it was Palestinian terrorist s firing
indiscriminately and then they came out
with a preliminary investigation where
they said it was um hundreds of bullets
from Palestinian gunmen and possibly an
exchange of fire between Palestinian
gunmen and Israeli security forces and
then when they came up with their final
report in September last year a high
possibility that she was accidentally
hit by Security Forces gunfire their
their explanations have changed
repeatedly which points clearly to her
to the untruths that we are being
presented with it makes us suspicious it
makes us so suspicious that we find it
hard to have any confidence in any
explanations that Israel gives and what
makes it particularly suspicious is why
won't they allow an investigation
they've blocked the FBI investigation
but we have again and again asked to to
be able to enter Israel not only to
investigate this killing
of Shireen but to hear from Israeli
victims they have a right to tell of
their experiences their suffering and
particularly these recent events victims
of these attacks civilian Israelis who
were injured whose family members were
killed they have a right to speak to us
as well so therefore this is what I said
at the general assembly saying to the
Israeli Ambassador who was present let
us in if you have nothing to hide why
not let us in so we could conduct
impartial
investigations I'm satisfied with where
we got with the limited resources
there's a lot to answer for I should
think that it's ready to be considered
by a prosecutor of the international
criminal
court so you know the truth can't be
hidden for long you identify the the
Commando unit the DU Devan apparently
also known as unit
217 being responsible um I've been
reading about them they apparently carry
out high-risk and complex operations
including targeted killings of militants
but they seem to on this occasion it's a
targeted killing of a journalist um is
it just the soldier who fired that round
who is legally responsible or does this
go up the chain of
command yeah no in international
law um under the Rome statute provides
for command responsibility that's why we
zeroed in on establishing the name of
the commander we don't know the name of
the soldier who actually fired the
bullet but we haven't stopped our
investigations we'll we'll be pursuing
it it's important that we know the name
of the commander but he because he
probably issued the order on which the
soldier who did the actual
shooting uh acted he followed orders you
have said that you're not allowed to go
uh into Israel or the Palestinian
territories they've not given you
permission to go there not only that
though um you've had lots of criticism
of your commission of inquiry from the
US who says you're B but Israel's gone
even further they say that your
commission of inquiry is anti-Semitic
what do you make of those allegations
let me first say James you know I was a
High Commissioner
for for it's a 4-year term I was I was
only one who whose term was extended to
six years yeah well Israel voted in
support of the extension of my term I'm
the only High Commissioner who was
invited to conduct a mission inside
Israel I mean nobody criticized me for
bias or of being an anti-Semitic these
kind of uh what I call abuse are being H
since I undertook this responsibility of
chearing the commission of inquiry I
will continue my work in uh in the
manner in which I have been accustomed
to we have our own standards uh together
with the other Commissioners so we will
continue the abuse does not deter us uh
on the other hand I could see that all
these actions really to distract
attention from the content of the report
I would like them to look at the
substance of our report and see where
we've gone wrong in terms of the facts
we've gathered and the law as we've
interpreted it so I'm very happy that
our recommendations have been adopted by
the general assembly and the question of
the lawfulness of the
occupation and the responsibility of per
of parties State members who support an
unlawful occupation are spelled out by
the international court of justice I do
see that that will advance the peace
process and not uh obstruct the peace
process as our detractors claim you're
not the only person who's come under
attack by Israel in recent days Israel
has been attacking a man you know very
well the Secretary General of the United
Nations Antonio Gus he said in the
security Council the attack by Hamas did
not happen in a vacuum Israel responded
by blocking un officials including the
humanitarian Chief Martin Griffith from
visiting and has called on the Secretary
General to resign do you see
similarities in the attacks on the UN
now and the attacks on your commission
of
inquiry I think the attacks on our
commission of inquiry are mild I'm uh
I'm I find that it's remarkable
how much the um the critics from Israel
have mounted their attacks on the
Secretary General himself this has never
happened before asking the Secretary
General to resign when he has made a
legitimate statement one country member
should not be
allowed to make statements such as this
or to call for the withdrawal of the
Secretary General I understand that the
foreign minister has since watered down
his statement it should never have been
made in the first place the Secretary
General made a legitimate statement in
my view and actually we are the ones who
provided the evidence of what's been
going on in the past
years which sets the uh factual
background to why the Secretary General
is quite right in saying that this
attack is not uh ju just something that
arose in
isolation but that we must look at the
context we must look at how desperate
Palestinians are for some end to the
conflict and the uh oppression under
which they have to live
daily you talk about the context in your
report you refer to the broader context
of the Israeli occupation which Israel
has no intention of ending with your
background in South Africa as the first
non white female high court judge in
South Africa do you think this is an
apartate regime yes I I think it is I
know that we've been asked to address it
as a address the issue of of apartheid
now in the commission we're still
getting there because we think the root
cause is the occupation itself apartheid
is one of the uh acts of discrimination
that are regularly practiced there and
let me say James as a South African who
born under apartheid and in the struggle
uh we we were very desperate to have
some kind of relief you know at the time
I never thought we'll see change in our
lives and it was at that time as
president Mela later explained to us
that at some point he had to very
reluctantly resort to the principle of
embarking on an armed struggle of course
admittedly they didn't uh go and kill a
whole lot of white people or civilians
they went for strategic U um structures
such as a a light pole or a oil storage
these kind of things but the point I'm
making is when you're back when you have
a whole population oppressed for so long
with no remedies no relief they are
actually forced to resolve thought to
Armed struggle however as a judge we do
condemn indiscriminate attacks on
civilians when you say that you don't
think Israel wants the occupation to end
you know the position of the
International Community and you hear it
every time there's a security council
meeting from all of the main players is
there needs to be a two-state solution
but you seem to be hinting at something
that none of them are PR prepared to say
the current Israeli government doesn't
want a two-state solution you know James
what we see effects on the ground yeah
there's hardly any territory left
there's been forcible
dislocation of
Palestinians um an increase of
settlements even against Security
Council
resolutions the moving in of Outsiders
all of which goes against the rules of
occupation actually if there are any
rules uh to this and this is why we
think that this
occupation uh has continued for so long
that Israel does not have any intention
of ending it and the possibilities of a
two State solution are remote directly
as a result of their actions and I'm
really surprised that many states
particularly in Europe think that the
status quo should just continue as is
but to what end and this is why I am
proud to serve on this commission which
majority of member states have adopted
in order to address the root causes of
the conflict and seek
remedies na P thank you for talking to
ALG thank you very
[Music]
much